memctl/templates/eco/commands/scan.md, before:

You are scanning a project folder to populate memctl memory.

Argument received: $ARGUMENTS

This is the **bootstrap command** — it creates the memory database and indexes
a folder in one step.

Behavior:

- **With a path argument** (e.g. `/scan src/` or `/scan .`):
  Call the `memory_inspect` MCP tool with `path` set to the argument.
  `memory_inspect` auto-mounts, auto-syncs, and produces a structural overview.
  Display the structural overview (file count, chunk count, extension breakdown,
  largest files, observations).
  Finish with: "Memory populated. Use /recall <query> to search."

- **No argument** (just `/scan`):
  Call `memory_inspect` with `path` set to `"."` (current directory).
  Display the result as above.

- **With `--full` flag** (e.g. `/scan . --full`):
  Call `memory_sync` with `path` set to the path argument and `full=true`
  to force a complete re-sync. Then call `memory_inspect` for the overview.

After scanning, suggest next steps:
- "/recall <keywords> — search your memory"
- "/remember <text> — store an observation"

Commit message:

feat(eco): v0.13.1 — eco bootstrap, memory_reset & slash commands
memory_reset MCP tool (#16) + memctl reset CLI:
- store.reset(): truncates 8 content tables in one transaction
- Preserves schema_meta (always) and memory_mounts (by default)
- Full middleware: guard → rate limit → execute → audit
- CLI: --dry-run, --confirm (safety gate), --clear-mounts

Five eco slash commands:
- /scan [path]    → memory_inspect (bootstrap)
- /recall <query> → memory_recall (search memory)
- /remember <text> → memory_propose (store observation)
- /reindex [preset] → memory_reindex (rebuild FTS, preview-first)
- /forget all     → memory_reset (reset memory, preview-first)

Eco config + bootstrap detection:
- Installer writes .claude/eco/config.json with db_path
- eco-hint.sh: 3-way branch (disabled / no-DB / normal)
- eco.md suggests /scan when no DB exists
- ECO.md: "First Use" section + command governance rule
- Concise hint (~30 tokens, was ~50)

Bootstrap fixes (v0.13.1):
- MemoryStore auto-creates parent directories for disk-backed DBs
- /scan template: MCP-first with correct CLI fallback syntax
- serve --check validates config without opening DB (install-time safe)

Tests: 994 passed, 6 skipped (28 new: 16 reset + 12 templates)

memctl/templates/eco/commands/scan.md, after:

You are scanning a project folder to populate memctl memory.

Argument received: $ARGUMENTS

This is the **bootstrap command** — it creates the memory database and indexes
a folder in one step.

## Primary path: MCP tools (preferred)

If the `memory_inspect` MCP tool is available, use it:

- **With a path argument** (e.g. `/scan src/` or `/scan .`):
  Call `memory_inspect(path="<argument>")`.
  It auto-mounts, auto-syncs, and produces a structural overview.

- **No argument** (just `/scan`):
  Call `memory_inspect(path=".")`.

- **With `--full` flag** (e.g. `/scan . --full`):
  Call `memory_sync(path="<argument>", full=true)` first,
  then `memory_inspect(path="<argument>")`.

## Fallback: CLI commands

If MCP tools are not available, use these exact CLI commands.
The DB path comes from `.claude/eco/config.json` (`db_path` field),
or defaults to `.memory/memory.db`.

```bash
# 1. Mount and sync (path is POSITIONAL, not --path)
memctl sync --db .memory/memory.db <path>

# 2. Inspect
memctl inspect --db .memory/memory.db <path>
```

If `/scan` is run with no argument, use `.` as the path.

## Display

Show the structural overview: file count, chunk count, size,
extension breakdown, largest files, observations.

Finish with: "Memory populated. Next steps:"
- "/recall <keywords> — search your memory"
- "/remember <text> — store an observation"
